How did you get interested in costuming? Well actually I've always been
interested in pretty clothes as it were but I actually to go to where I got
interest in costuming you kind of have to go back to the beginning of fandom.
And for me I'm been interested in science fiction literature since around the
beginning of junior high when I discovered that I didn't have all that many
friends and there wasn't much else to do and I was a ravenous reader and I read
all the horror stories in the book in the library and all the dog stories in the
library, and I didn't like mysteries, and I didn't like romances, and all that
was left was science fiction, so I grudgingly took science fiction down off the
shelf and started, and I've been hooked ever since. It was kind of like the most
wonderful thing I'd ever discovered, a genre of literature where your
imagination can run completely wild, and for a long time, I knew absolutely
nothing about fandom, and then I discovered Star Trek. interesting enough my
stepfather was watching it and I happen to sit down one evening and I was hooked
from then on because it was a wonderful world of the future where all kinds of
imaginative things were happening but more importantly it was still a world
about people and it was people conquering the future and conquering problems and
most of all conquering themselves and at the time that was my biggest problem
was trying to learn how to deal with myself and deal with the people around me
so I became an avid Trekkie and I still didn't know about fandom. But one day
after Star Trek, there was a big advertisement for a Star Trek convention in
Dallas, and it was going to have some of the stars there and everything, and I'd
never heard of such a thing. But it sounded like a lot of fun, so we went down,
and then I ran into nearly 1,500 to 2,000 fans who also liked Star Trek, who
also had a reason for coming to science fiction and fantasy, and had been
touched by Star Trek because of this feeling they had. And, all of a sudden, I
had a family and a place to belong, and I've been an avid fan ever since, going
to as many conventions as I could. And one aspect of this convention was
costuming, and I'd always been sort of interested in theatre and that sort of
thing, but never really involved. But here were all these people who weren't
really into theatre and weren't performers, but they had all these wonderful
costumes and were going up and doing the masquerades. The next time they had a
convention, I was ready and I had my first costume. It was a very poorly made
mirror mirror costume from the Star Trek episode Mirror Mirror. But it was a
beginning and it was something and all of a sudden I was involved and I had a
part in a world where in my life I didn't have much of anything that I really
belonged to. And through fandom and science fiction and belonging to that world
I eventually learned how to belong in a normal world again and basically it
changed my entire life. I actually even became popular in high school, which at
the time that I started in fandom, I would have thought that popularity was
something I would never see. So, and then it grew from there. I became a theater
and drama major at UTA and I now work as a professional singer and performer and
do a lot of costuming with that job and freelance costuming, but my first love
is still making characters come alive on the stage at science fiction and
fantasy conventions because I think that what I was searching for at the time
was a reality I could fit into and I think that's what the other fans are
searching for and The Masquerade gives me a chance to make that dream become a
reality. Give us a specific example of bringing a character to life. All right,
for example, one of our most successful costume skits that we designed, and I
had some other people with me at the time. We went to WorldCon in Boston, and we
had a young fellow who was a good friend of mine, and my little sister did a
Star Wars skit together. But what they did was the lights darkened, and the Star
Wars theme came up, and all of a sudden, Luke Skywalker came flying through the
air, were doing somersaults onto the stage, stopped, and did a one-handed
handstand very precariously balancing using the Force to hold him up, and then
Yoda came slowly onto the stage, nodding wisely, and instructing him on the use
of the Force. He didn't get it right the first time, then he tried again the
second time, and finally succeeded with a perfect one-handed handstand,
balancing with the use of the Force, and then leapt up, did a couple more flying
leaps and somersaults in the middle of the air across the stage, and left
standing ovation by 9,000 screaming people who, for them, Star Wars was alive.
And that particular skit that was one that I designed and my little sister and
boyfriend at the time took part in, one the first prize for best presentation at
a World Con. And there were about 150 entrants in that masquerade. But this was
special because all of the sudden their characters were alive. Another one that
I have done has been extremely Wait a second. Back up and give us a genesis of
how you put this all together, how the costumes got it, how the idea for the
action, the plot storyline that you had. Give us a little rendition of how that
came together. Okay. The way that skit came together is that we were sitting
around, and we wanted to go to WorldCon. Of course, everyone wanted to take part
in the Masquerade, because it's kind of your chance to be a star, as it were.
And the audiences at Worldcon are so large that it's probably the largest
audience you will ever have even if you do Broadway. My little sister was very
interested in performing but she only likes to perform behind a mask because
that way she's more secure. And my boyfriend was a gymnast and so we decided we
needed to do something to do a useful thing with these gymnastic skills. Just
recently we'd been asked by a theater to come and do a Star Wars performance for
their opening of Empire. And so we went and did the opening and built him a Luke
Skywalker outfit for the opening. And when he was there, he was playing around
and discovered that he could do most of the force stunts just by virtue of his
gymnastic training because he'd been like fifth in the state in gymnastics. And
then my little sister started playing around and rehearsing and working on
looking like Yodon, walking like Yodon, having the mannerisms. And it dawned on
me, since we had a special talent here, we could use that to bring this special
thing to fans, who probably never dreamed of the fact that the force could be
made to come alive. If we hadn't had a gymnast, we could've figured out a way to
do it with wires, but it was that much more special, because it was real and
live. That was how that particular act came together. I also have another one
that has been extremely successful. is called Morgan Le Fay. And the character,
basically, I was sitting around trying to think of what is a really way out
character that's not all that well-known, but that could command the stage and
make that same kind of reality come about. And it occurred to me that very
little has been done with the sorceress Morgan Le Fay, who's from the Arthurian
legend and who was the one that eventually defeated Merlin. And I thought if I
can make this character do a spell on stage so that the audience really believes
it, that that would be an excellent kind of costume to do. So I designed the
costume. And of course, it's different than designing a costume for a movie
character or a television character because it was completely up to my
imagination what I wanted to do with it. So I used a lot of reds and blacks and
lots of gold to create a total effect of color but somber, evil color and made a
very large headdress with lots of sparkles on it to catch the light and designed
it in such a way so that it would give the impression of an evil sorceress who
had a lot of power and was a ruler in her own right and designed the cloak so
that it would actually fold out into a half circle so that it would look like
bat wings on the back. The costume was beautiful, but that's not enough. the
next thing I did was I wanted to design something for her to do. So I wrote a
spell. I decided that she would probably be pissed at someone because she's
usually angry at someone most of the time and was famous for destroying people
and things. So I wrote a spell wherein she was summoning the spirits of darkness
who came and gathered around her and then she sends them off to go destroy all
her enemies, which is nice, but again, that wasn't enough. So the next thing I
did is I started listening to albums, trying to find some music that would
summon the mood because I wanted a very somber, evil mood, sort of like the
building of a thunderstorm. And I finally came across in the album Lion and
Winter a very somber, evil-sounding piece of music which sounded very much like
a thunderstorm building, coming into the foreground and then receding. And then
I worked the spell so that it would work exactly around the crescendos. And then
I added a soundtrack record which had thunder and lightning on it, and went into
my handy dandy little stereo set in the middle of living room, bought a bunch of
patch cords from Radio Shack so the room looked like Spaghetti'sville, and
patched it all together. Using a normal hand-mic and a reverb effect from the
speakers being on at the same time as a recording, managed to get an evil
reverberating sound to the voice, lightning and thunder in the background, this
awesome evil music building and flowing in a high climax and fading out in the
distance so I had a wonderful soundtrack and if the mic failed I'd still be fine
because I had it all on tape. The next thing I did was I needed something else,
something special that would still make it believable. Now the sound was there
and the sight was there but it needed something extra. So I went down to the
magic store and bought a special magic gizmo and some flash paper and the way
the actual skit came off was something like this. The stage would darken and
then you'd see a red glow moving up onto the stage and you'd see just the
outline of this bizarre golden mask and headdress and a red-garbed woman holding
the red globe. Then the music starts and starts to build and all of a sudden the
spell starts and then suddenly there's a burst of flame from the red globe. And
as the spill builds and she starts summoning the darkness the room gets darker
for a moment and then there's another burst of flame and the room starts to
lighten just a little bit and the spell builds and builds until finally she
banishes the light from her and says darkness be gone and then blast this huge
shot of fire blue flame straight up into the sky and the darkness is gone and
then she tells you that she is Morgan Le Fay and then demonstrates the costume
and shows the wide wings of the bat and slowly walks off as the thunder fades
into the distance again I got a standing ovation the The costume has never not
won a prize. It has always been first and second everywhere I've taken it. And
there are better costumes, but it comes to life, and that's what the people are
looking for, is a way to bring their fantasies and their dreams into reality so
they can touch them, so it's something they can really have a tangible
experience from. I've seen you do your thing before, and it's not just walking
up, showing the costume, striking a pose and leaving you have a performance that
you do exactly just
reiterate a little bit of why you decided to add that extra dimension well I've
seen a lot of masquerade and when I started the thing was that everyone walked
up there turned around and walked off and it was nice but after about the 50th
person, it can get real boring. And since the Masquerade was designed with an
audience in mind, it seemed to me that there should be something more
entertaining for them. And some people were doing little bitty skits and
flourishes if they had a sword and stuff like that. But it still wasn't enough.
It was still Johnny in a costume trying to show off his sword, or every now and
then there'd be a nice skit that was really funny, and that was the high point.
But very few high points for a lot of people going through the line and showing
their costumes, and I started thinking about, well, what is a masquerade really
supposed to be? What is it all about? And also, there was the fact that although
I'm not a bad seamstress, neither am I equipped to go work for Warner Brothers
Studios or something like that. And it occurred to me that if I was going to
win, and if I was going to capture these people's imagination, I'd do something
more than walk up there with a brilliant costume turn around and walk off and
also I think part of it's the actress in me, if I'm going to do something and
play like I'm a character I want to play like I'm really that character I want
to feel it and be it and make it as real as possible because it's more fun for
me you know if I'm going to be Princess Lea I'd like to have a chance to really
feel like I'm Princess Lea out to save the Rebel Alliance or whatever and it
seemed like that was what was lacking, the people were trying for that They
wanted to do that, they wouldn't have built the costume if they didn't want for
a minute to feel like they were that hero or villain or whatever, but the extra
touches weren't there. And so I decided that that would be a good thing to do.
And when I got to Worldcon, I discovered that that was what was preferred. And
as a matter of fact, now most Worldcon costumes are designed with the idea of
trying to bring that character to life in some way, and make a show of it even
if it's only a a minute long because most of them it's good not to do it over a
minute or a minute and a half. But even in a minute or a minute and a half, you
can bring it to life and when I choose a character to do and I'm trying to
decide what I'm going to do for the next costume, the first question I ask is
what is it about this character that is special that will bring this character
to life? What can I do to make this character stand out so it's not just a
costume on a stage? And if the answer is nothing, if there's nothing special
about that character, that costume, I won't do it.
Okay.
There is costuming for movie characters and for literary characters. Which one
is more challenging? I would assume it would be the literary characters. But
what are the different challenges doing a movie character versus a written
character? Well, of course, there are the two kinds, like you mentioned, the
media and the literary. Actually, it depends. I think one of my greatest
challenges was recreating the characters from Heavy Metal, which I did last
year, because the costumes were designed on animated figures, and I was trying
to recreate them onto live-action figures exact in detail. And for me, it is
almost harder to do an exact detailed replica of an existing costume than to
just be able to let my imagination go wild and do whatever. And the reason for
that is if you get it wrong, they're going to know, where if you're doing a
costume from your imagination, you can make it very elaborate, but if something
doesn't work, you can say, oh well, I didn't like that effect anyway. Let's do
something different. It takes more time and you have to put a lot more detail
onto an imaginary costume, but it takes an extreme amount of discipline and
creativity to do an exact reproduction. Unfortunately, the exact reproductions
usually do the least winning unless you've got something special to add to them
because the inspiration for the costumes is available to anyone. You know, go to
the movies, go to TV, you can see the costumes. And so we tend to have an
overrun of Starfleet uniforms and Jawas and Stormtroopers and I remember one
masquerade. We had seven Han Solos and five Luke Skywalkers and six Princess
Leias. Wookiees are a little harder, but there have been two of them on
occasion. But yet they're very challenging to do to get them right, and a lot of
times you can spot that one's not quite right. But they don't do the most
winning. So usually when I do a media costume, it's not necessarily aimed for
the masquerade. It's usually aimed for something to bring the convention itself
to life by wearing around the halls. The exception being Tarna. We had a show we
could put on with Tarna. We recreated part of the movie on stage and were able
to do it convincingly in such a way, again, as to bring the character to life.
But if I couldn't have done that, I would have never put the character on the
stage just to show off the costume, even though it was actually harder to build
than Morgana, which was an imaginary costume. I'm glad you brought that up about
parading through the halls before the main show. I want to get on that. When you
do a literary costume, are there any authors, because of the way they write or
the way they describe things, who you tend to gravitate toward when you do
characters? Actually, what I prefer to do when I'm doing a literary character is
I prefer to pick a character that has the least description about what they are
and the most potential. Gods and goddesses are wonderful. Spirits are wonderful.
Things that you really can't imagine as belonging in the real world are the best
things when you're doing an imaginary costume. For example, if you're doing a
snow spirit, you can go absolutely crazy on cloaks and full-spread backdrops and
headdresses that reach from here to heaven and back and that kind of thing that
are absolutely ridiculous for a real person to be wearing around the streets.
But if you're talking about a mythical being or a creature or a spirit, you can
go absolutely hog wild and they look the best on stage. A set that we're working
on right now, as a matter of fact, we're doing a series called The Three Fates
and we're doing birth, death, and destiny. Again, these are spirits. They're
characters that don't have any actual human parameters, so we can go absolutely
nuts on the costume as far as just getting the feeling across and doing anything
we want to make something super flamboyant. It's much harder to do an actual
real living character because, again, you have to deal with something that's
possible that a person would actually wear around and still make it beautiful
enough and interesting enough that it takes over the stage. and if you don't
have the skit or the characterization to go with it, no matter what you do or
how well you do it, it's not going to cut it.
Okay, what about the wearing of the costumes during the con? You may not wear
the same costume on stage that you do down the hall. Yeah, I've noticed at the
cons there are the masquerade costumes, And then there are the everyday wear,
not state-of-the-roll. The everyday costume, the ones you wear during the-
Exactly, exactly. Hall costumes versus stage costumes. What's the difference?
The difference is that a hall costume, for example, Starfleet uniforms are
wonderful hall costumes. They're terrible on the stage unless you've written a
play or a skit to go with them, and which is the play or skit that does the
winning, not the costume. but they're wonderful for costumes because you can
really be from the Enterprise down on shore leave looking through a bazaar or
going to lectures or whatever and there's a lot of the let's pretend We're
bringing it to life in the everyday kind of syndrome with real people and this
is when you can sink your teeth into a live character because this is where the
live character type of outfits work so well, you can be Conan or his lady or you
can be a stormtrooper or Luke and Han and Leia, you know, on and get into the
everyday, let's pretend aspect of it where these characters would die on stage,
unless you have something special, you don't have to be able to do anything to
wear a Hulk costume. And yet at the same time, you can have a lot of fun. It's
fun for other people because it brings the convention to life. Hey, they came
here to, to get into science fiction and fantasy and wow, look, there's Han Solo
right over there, all of a sudden it's special for them. Masqueragers and hall
costumers are doing a service actually, they're making fun for themselves
because they can pretend but they're making fun for everyone else because
they're making it come alive. And that's why conventions are as popular as they
are now anyway is because the fans are looking for a way to bring the whole
thing out, to make it more real, to touch the authors that make this magic, to
touch the artists that create the magic, to make it all something more tangible
than just what they see in a book. And the hall costumes are absolutely
essential for that. And then again, we have a different kind of hall costume,
which is the medieval society costume. And none of these are stage costumes.
They never are. Most of them are much better made than stage costumes because
they're clothes. And the medieval society usually shows up at conventions to
promote their club and to bring a touch of the fantasy element into it and bring
the medieval ages to life and so forth. And they have a completely different
kind of costume, but again, it's a hall costume. About the medieval society, are
you speaking to the Society for Creative Anachronism? There are several. There
is the Society for Creative Anachronisms, which is most prevalent here in the
Southwest, and it's nationwide, but down here it's the only one we have. There
also are the Marklanders, which are a slightly different variation on the same
kind of theme. I believe there are one or two others, but those are the two
major ones. So there's more than one kind of medieval society, but the major
one, largest one, is the Society for Creative Anachronisms. And they recreate
all aspects of medieval life. But since fantasy is such a big part of the
science fiction and fantasy genre, and since most fantasies are based on a
medieval way of life, they fit right in to the convention scene. Which kind of
costumes are more interesting to work on? Science fiction type of costume or a
fantasy costume? Actually, it really depends. They're all fun to work on if
you've got a good idea and some place to go with it. And it doesn't matter
whether they're science fiction or fantasy. Most of the better costumes are
fantasy, simply because fantasy is so open-ended that you can go really berserk
on what you're doing with it. But I have seen some really phenomenal ideas to do
for science fiction costumes as well. The problem with science fiction is that
most of it is technical and nuts and bolts and space suits and things like that,
and you have to really reach to find a creative way to do something different.
But I have seen some really phenomenal things done with robotics and weaponry
and nuts and bolts things. I prefer the fantasy-type things because you don't
have any limitations. You don't have to make it look like it could work. You can
just go bananas on it. But then again, McCaffrey has turned dragons into a
science fiction character, which were once totally fantasy, so who can say?
They're both equally challenging if you just have the right idea and an
interesting enough idea to make it challenging. at a masquerade um is there an
error of competition or do people help each other and admire each other it's
kind of one big happy family it depends where you are just like any other
competition it depends who's involved i have been in masquerades where it was
tooth and nail and they were out for blood and i've been in masquerades where it
was one big happy family and everybody was helping everybody else and they were
glad when the best costume won, and whoever won and it didn't matter. So it
really depends on where you are. At Worldcon, a lot of times in the Masters
category, it's tooth and nail simply because these people are very, very good at
what they do and they really want to win because they've been at it for so long.
But at a small local convention, for example, the Starcon in Lubbock, It's very
small, very friendly. Everybody helps everybody. For example, I'm probably going
to be one of the judges, and I've already loaned out about six things out of my
costume wardrobe to help people out with their costumes, you know, and don't
feel anything about doing it. Where at a much larger convention where it was
much more serious, I wouldn't do that because some people might be offended. But
we try to keep it a happy family, And I've seen a lot less of the blood feud
type masquerades than I have of the happy family type masquerades because
usually everybody's there for a good time and they're all there for the same
purpose, to bring it to life. And as long as everybody's after the same thing,
it's all fun. The only major problems that we have with masquerades is a lot of
conventions slough them off as, oh, well, we have to do this, and they really
don't know what they're doing. and the biggest tragedies are when the
contestants are mistreated by the convention because the convention really
doesn't care about the contestants and what they're doing and they really don't
care if it's well run and the masquerade's just kind of an afterthought. And
that's the only time I've seen any real problems. Because most of these people
have worked quite a while to put their... A good example, which is a good
example of a lot of things going wrong with the convention, was the Ultimate
Fantasy and Houston Convention, which was held in Houston just recently. It's
already gotten in a lot of the magazines for the fiasco of the Ultimate Fantasy,
but a little-known tragedy that people don't know about is at one time it was
scheduled that there was to be a masquerade, and we went, and there were a lot
of really wonderful costumes that showed up, and costumes that could have won on
a regional level. and what turned out is there almost wasn't a masquerade at
all. It was kind of a joke. There was no official judges. Fortunately, by the
good graces of Richard Penny, who with his wife, Wendy, they do the Elfquest
books, he showed up, got a couple other people to join with him, and they went
ahead and did judging and announced a winner and so forth. But the convention
itself had sort of washed its hands of the whole thing and was just going to
leave the masqueraders you're standing there with a rock band playing in the
background, when what they'd come to do was the masquerade, not dance in
costume, you can do that on Halloween at any local disco, but it worked out
because again, the pros worked with the costumers to try and make it work, and
although there were no prizes, at least there was a costume contest and there
was an award, and people didn't feel quite so cheated, but the con had just kind
of sloughed it off. I don't want to open a can of worms but there is a
controversy about weapons in the costumers. Is that just kind of a mini-bruhaha?
Actually there is a big deal about weapons but it generally has nothing to do
with the masquerade because unless the masquerade is very poorly run they
usually have enough space where you can do pretty well anything you want and if
you kill yourself on stage that's your tough luck. It's a good idea when using
weapons, if you're going to do anything with a weapon, for God's sake,
choreograph it until you know absolutely perfectly what you're doing before you
ever get up on stage and flourish a weapon. The weapons brouhaha is mainly over
weapons being worn on costumes in the halls. Now, we don't have as much a
problem with it here in the Southwest as they do other places, but the flack
that's coming down from other places has reached here. Basically, what happens
is you have a lot of kids who get a hold of a sword, and they throw it on their
Conan costume, and they draw it in the halls and so forth. We've managed to stop
most of that, because there are simple rules of courtesy, which can be observed,
and weapons are strictly, most of us observe weapons, as strictly a piece of
jewelry that is worn with a costume to complete it. And if you look at it that
way, it's very safe, and you never draw it in public, except with permission by
all around, and you certainly never do duels in the hallway, Duels are strictly
for the masquerade or join a society like the creative anachronisms where you
can fight if you really want to fight. A lot of conventions, rather than ban
them, have instead instituted a policy that if you draw it where you're not
supposed to, or if you threaten some with it where you're not supposed to, you
lose it for the duration of the convention. The ones who have done that and who
have let groups like the society enforce their rules, who have a very strict
code of honor concerning weapons, haven't had any problem. And the main problem
isn't with the normal fans and the people who do costuming and who are serious
about what they do. The main problem is with the kids or the people off the
street who think weapons are a neat, fun toy and, oh, boy, now we can sword
fight because we're at a convention or, oh, boy, now we can shoot somebody with
a water pistol because we're at a convention. It's not allowed anywhere else and
it's not allowed at a convention either. Conventioning does not give you an
excuse to do these kind of bad things and it's a few who are trying to ruin it
for the many. and that's basically all the weapons thing is. The best weapons
policy I've seen for a major convention is what Chicago had. I did not attend
Chicago but I did read their weapons policy and basically it's stated keep your
blade, if you're wearing a blade, keep it sheathed at all times unless you were
showing the blade in which case you have to do it in a basically secluded spot,
make sure there's no one around who could be startled by your drawing the blade
and make sure they know you're doing it and strictly to show not in a defense or
attack position, but in a showing position where it could not possibly be
construed as a threat. Even then, the con had the right, if they thought you
were drawing it in a threatening manner, to confiscate it. No weapons that shot
things, no water guns, no frisbee guns, nothing that shot any kind of actual
substance, even if it was just water, nothing that looked like a real gun,
because there have been occasions when people have brought real weapons into a
hotel. Even if they had nothing to do with the convention, it caused problems,
so no replicas that looked like real guns, even if it does go with the costume,
and courtesy about how you wear them so that you don't slam into people's legs
because your sword's stuck out behind you, and no livestock.